Blockchain is a decentralized digital ledger that securely stores records across a network of computers in a way that is transparent, immutable, and resistant to tampering. Each "block" contains data, and blocks are linked in a chronological "chain."


Key Takeaways
Blockchain is a type of shared database that differs from a typical database in the way it stores information; blockchains store data in blocks linked together via cryptography.
Different types of information can be stored on a blockchain, but the most common use has been as a transaction ledger. 
In Bitcoin’s case, the blockchain is decentralized, so no single person or group has control—instead, all users collectively retain control.
Decentralized blockchains are immutable, which means that the data entered is irreversible. For Bitcoin, transactions are permanently recorded and viewable to anyone.


The Bitcoin blockchain collects transaction information and enters it into a 4MB file called a block (different blockchains have different size blocks).

Transaction Process : 
In Bitcoin, your transaction is sent to a memory pool, where it is stored and queued until a miner picks it up. Once it is entered into a block and the block fills up with transactions, it is closed, and the mining begins.

A new Transaction in entered.
               |
The transaction is then transmitted to a network of peer-to-peer computers scattered across the world.
               |
This network of computers then solves equations to confirm the validity of the transaction.
               |
Once confirmed to be legitimate transactions, they are clustered together into blocks.
               |
These blocks are then chained together creating a long history of all transactions that are permanent. 
               |
The transaction is complete.
               



Every node in the network proposes its own blocks in this way because they all choose different transactions. Each works on their own blocks, trying to find a solution to the difficulty target, using the "nonce," short for number used once.


The nonce value is a field in the block header that is changeable, and its value incrementally increases with every mining attempt. If the resulting hash isn't equal to or less than the target hash, a value of one is added to the nonce, a new hash is generated, and so on. The nonce rolls over about every 4.5 billion attempts (which takes less than one second) and uses another value called the extra nonce as an additional counter. This continues until a miner generates a valid hash, winning the race and receiving the reward.


Fact :

Generating these hashes until a specific value is found is the "proof-of-work" you hear so much about—it "proves" the miner did the work. The sheer amount of work it takes to validate the hash is why the Bitcoin network consumes so much computational power and energy.


Pros and Cons of Blockchain
For all of its complexity, blockchain’s potential as a decentralized form of record-keeping is almost without limit. From greater user privacy and heightened security to lower processing fees and fewer errors, blockchain technology may very well see applications beyond those outlined above. But there are also some disadvantages.

Pros
Improved accuracy by removing human involvement in verification

Cost reductions by eliminating third-party verification

Decentralization makes it harder to tamper with

Transactions are secure, private, and efficient

Transparent technology

Provides a banking alternative and a way to secure personal information for citizens of countries with unstable or underdeveloped governments

Cons
Significant technology cost associated with some blockchains

Low number of transactions per second

History of use in illicit activities, such as on the dark web

Regulation varies by jurisdiction and remains uncertain

Data storage limitations




What Is a Blockchain in Easy Terms?
Imagine you typed some information into a document on your computer and sent it through a program that gave you a string of numbers and letters (called hashing, with the string called a hash). You add this hash to the beginning of another document and type information into it. Again, you use the program to create a hash, which you add to the following document. Each hash is a representation of the previous document, which creates a chain of encoded documents that cannot be altered without changing the hash. Each document is stored on computers in a network. This network of programs compares each document with the ones they have stored and accepts them as valid based on the hashes they generate. If a document doesn't generate a hash that is a match, that document is rejected by the network.



ref - https://www.investopedia.com/terms/b/blockchain.asp