Specifically, a few real-world examples of blockchains application in these industries include:

Digital media transfer: for example the sale of art and collectibles with non-fungible tokens (NFTs)
Remote services delivery: for example in the travel and tourism industry
Decentralized business logic: for example moving computing to data sources
Distributed intelligence: for example in education credentialing
Distributed resources: for example, in power generation and distribution
Crowdfunding: for example in startup financing
Crowd operations: for example, in electronic voting
Identity management: for example, having a single ID
And many more


To recap, at its core blockchain technology enables three main innovations:

Peer-to-peer transactions in a decentralized network
Establishing trust among unknown peers
Recording transactions in an immutable distributed ledger



In the Bitcoin blockchain, transactions are a basic element:

Transactions are validated and broadcast
Many transactions form a single block
Many blocks form a chain



Understanding a Single Transaction in the Bitcoin Blockchain

A core concept of the bitcoin network is an Unspent Transaction Output, otherwise known as UTXO.

The set of all UTXOs in the Bitcoin network collectively translate the state of the Bitcoin blockchain.


UTXOs are referenced as the inputs of a transaction and are also the outputs generated from a transaction.

All UTXOs in the system are stored by the network's participant nodes in a database.

In the Bitcoin blockchain, a transaction uses the amount specified by one or more UTXOs and transmits it to one or more new output UTXOs.




The structure of a UTXO includes:

A unique identifier of the transaction that created the UTXO
An index of the position of the UTXO in the transaction output lists
A value of the transaction
An optional script that specifies the conditions of which the output can be spent




The transaction itself includes the following elements:

A reference number of the current transaction
Reference(s) to one of more input UTXOs
Reference(s) to one of more output UTXOs generated from the current transaction
The total input and output amount



Operations in a decentralized networks are the responsibility of the peer participants and their respective computational nodes.



In particular, these operations include:

Gathering the transactions for a block
Broadcasting valid transactions and blocks
Reaching consensus on the next block to be created
Chaining the blocks together to form an immutable record




Bitcoin Blockchain Operations
Let's take a look at the operations of the Bitcoin blockchain in more detail.

There are two major participants in the bitcoin network...

The first participants are people that initiate the transfer of value by creating a transaction.

The second group of participants are called miners, which provide the computational resources needed to:

Verify transactions
Broadcast transactions
Compete for the right to create a block
Reach consensus by validating the block
Broadcast the new block
Confirm transactions
For these computational resources provided by miners, they are incentivized and rewarded with newly minted bitcoin, which is currently set at 6.25 BTC.

The algorithm that miners use to reach consensus is called the proof-of-work protocol, which t requires the miner to provide the computational work required to solve a puzzle and claim the right to add a new block to the chain.

To summarize, the main operations in a blockchain include transaction validation and block creation with a consensus of the participants.



In addition to the bitcoin cryptocurrency, the Bitcoin blockchain supports an optional feature called scripts for the conditional transfer of values.

The Ethereum blockchain extended this scripting feature into a complete execution framework called smart contracts.

A smart contract provides the powerful capability of code execution that embeds business logic into the blockchain.