A Proof of Stake (PoS), (i.e. using in-protocol asset, SOL, to provide secure consensus) design is outlined here. Solana implements a proof of stake reward/security scheme for validator nodes in the cluster. The purpose is threefold:

Align validator incentives with that of the greater cluster through skin-in-the-game deposits at risk

Avoid 'nothing at stake' fork voting issues by implementing slashing rules aimed at promoting fork convergence

Provide an avenue for validator rewards provided as a function of validator participation in the cluster.

Solana's ledger validation design is based on a rotating, stake-weighted selected leader broadcasting transactions in a PoH data structure to validating nodes. These nodes, upon receiving the leader's broadcast, have the opportunity to vote on the current state and PoH height by signing a transaction into the PoH stream.

To become a Solana validator, one must deposit/lock-up some amount of SOL in a contract. This SOL will not be accessible for a specific time period. The precise duration of the staking lockup period has not been determined. However we can consider three phases of this time for which specific parameters will be necessary:

Warm-up period: which SOL is deposited and inaccessible to the node, however PoH transaction validation has not begun. Most likely on the order of days to weeks

Validation period: a minimum duration for which the deposited SOL will be inaccessible, at risk of slashing (see slashing rules below) and earning rewards for the validator participation. Likely duration of months to a year.

Cool-down period: a duration of time following the submission of a 'withdrawal' transaction. During this period validation responsibilities have been removed and the funds continue to be inaccessible. Accumulated rewards should be delivered at the end of this period, along with the return of the initial deposit.

Solana's trustless sense of time and ordering provided by its PoH data structure, along with its turbine data broadcast and transmission design, should provide sub-second transaction confirmation times that scale with the log of the number of nodes in the cluster. This means we shouldn't have to restrict the number of validating nodes with a prohibitive 'minimum deposits' and expect nodes to be able to become validators with nominal amounts of SOL staked. At the same time, Solana's focus on high-throughput should create incentive for validation clients to provide high-performant and reliable hardware. Combined with potentially a minimum network speed threshold to join as a validation-client, we expect a healthy validation delegation market to emerge.